---
layout: post
title: Why?
date: '2013-11-02T10:46:00.001Z'
author: Paul Law
tags:
- musings
modified_time: '2013-11-03T09:53:51.125Z'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-6989692556630001604.post-1325578719449264790
blogger_orig_url: http://relaycomputer.blogspot.com/2013/11/why.html
---

Whenever I tell people I'm building a relay computer the overwhelming response 
is ... why on Earth would you want to do that?! Or alternatively, as a work 
colleague delicately put it to me yesterday, if you go to the front of your 
house there's a big block of wood that opens — it's called a door — if you go 
through it you'll discover pubs and things. They've all got a point though, 
this project will be very time consuming and I've not particularly got a use 
in mind for the resulting jumble of wires. In fact it's difficult to think of 
a real use for it as I'll be left with something that could be outperformed by 
a pocket calculator (not a scientific calculator mind, more the kind you might 
find in a Christmas cracker). So why would I invest lots of time and effort in 
to making a relay computer? Well, as they say (rather tritely) it's the 
journey not the destination.

I've always been interested in 
electronics. As a child I would delight in taking things apart to see how they 
worked; always marvelling at those green circuit boards within with all the 
variety of bits and bobs soldered to them. This intrigue was all usually at 
the expense, literally, of my parents as I'd tend to have far more success 
taking things apart than I would putting them back together again. Naturally 
as I got older I started to learn a little more and started putting shop 
bought kits together — usually complete failures as I'd cook the components 
with my clumsy soldering but there were some successes. I didn't stick around 
for A levels at school but after a couple of years working in reprographics 
for a local screen printers I decided it was time to get back in to education 
and learn some more ... electronics still the natural choice for me. 
Unfortunately the time I decided to get on with electronics was also the time 
the college canned the courses through lack of interest. Given this I decided 
to plump for my second interest ... software development.

So here I 
am now thirty-six years of age and programming computers is now my day job and 
has been since college. Actually, being a software developer (or computer 
programmer, software engineer or whatever it is we're calling ourselves this 
season) has become my first love now; I find it deeply satisfying. My interest 
in electronics has never really gone away though — it's been hibernating — 
waiting to be awoken again when the right project comes along. Trouble is I've 
never had anything I fancy making ... then it hit me ... I use computers day 
in day out but I don't really have all that much of an appreciation for how 
they really work under the hood. Even when I was a kid and computers were much 
simpler you could understand the overall architecture but it was all just 
theory in a way. I remember my parents bought me a spectrum +2a for the not 
inconsiderable sum of £129.99 (we actually got through three of them — each 
week taking the latest one back to Dixons for a replacement due to tape deck 
faults). Once I'd exhausted all the games that came with it I got in to 
programming in BASIC and then eventually I delved into assembly language. That 
gave me a real feel for what the computer was actually doing but it still 
seemed quite advanced and a long way from where computers had actually started 
from. The seed was therefore sown — if I wanted to get a feel for where 
computers had come from I should get acquainted with some really old computers 
— if I really, really, wanted to get a feel for where computers had come from 
I should have a go at building something like a really old computer.

It just so happened a few months later that on a visit to see my folks 'oop 
north' I popped into the [National Museum of Computing](http://www.tnmoc.org/) 
(highly recommended if you're 
of a certain age and want to be filled to the brim with nostalgia). They had 
recently completed the [Harwell Dekatron](http://www.tnmoc.org/special-projects/harwell-dekatron-witch) 
restoration (also known as WITCH), 
restored so successfully in fact that the computer was happily operating away 
to itself on the day I visited. There's a certain beauty to the machine — all 
the flashing lights and clicking relays. It's certainly not dainty — you 
wouldn't want it sat on your foot — but there's just a certain something about 
it. It was at this point where I decided to kill all my birds with one 
boulder - I would create something that had a nod to the machines of this era; 
learn more about electronics along the way (using the old fashioned learning method 
of trial and error) and get that first hand understanding how computers really 
work. Even better I'd get to make my own assembler and if I really, really, 
fancied it might even make a high level language compiler for it (assuming I 
haven't died of old age by then of course).

So there we have it — 
this is a project that's about satisfying curiosity and interest; a project 
about exercising creativity and problem solving; a project about making theory 
concrete and tangible. Ultimately it's a hobby — I'll still go to the gym, 
socialise, get nicely drunk at the pub — but it's something I'm looking 
forward to and even a little bit excited over. Soldering irons at the ready? 
Yes? Then off we go ... 